{"Documento": "Tese de Doutorado", "Autor": "Barbosa, Carlos Eduardo (Catálogo USP)", "Nome completo": "Carlos Eduardo Barbosa", "E-mail": "carlos.barbosa@usp.br;kadu.barbosa@gmail", "Unidade da USP": "Instituto de Astronomia, Geofísica e Ciências Atmosféricas", "Área do Conhecimento": "Astronomia", "Data de Defesa": "2016-09-26", "Imprenta": "São Paulo, 2016", "Orientador": "Oliveira, Claudia Lucia Mendes de (Catálogo USP)", "Banca examinadora": ["Oliveira, Claudia Lucia Mendes de (Presidente)", "Amram, Philippe", "Coelho, Paula Rodrigues Teixeira", "Cypriano, Eduardo Serra", "Dors Junior, Oli Luiz"], "Título em inglês": "Kinematics and stellar populations of galaxies in the local universe", "Palavras-chave em inglês": ["galaxies: elliptical and lenticular and cD", "galaxies: evolution", "galaxies: formation", "galaxies: kinematics and dynamics", "galaxies: stellar content"], "Resumo em inglês": "Galaxies are the major building blocks of the universe, but we are still learning about fundamental aspects of their formation. In particular, we would like to understand how galaxies acquire their stars, and where and when these stars were born. In this thesis, we investigate these questions by the study of the dynamical and chemical abundances of galaxies in the local universe. Extending previous works in the field, we have developed a Bayesian framework to obtain luminosity-weighted ages, metallicities and alpha-element abundances. In our initial study, we have surveyed six galaxy groups to understand how this particular environment may be related to morphological transformations. We have obtained a sample of 59 group members with a wide range of dynamical masses, which have been used to demonstrate that the mass-metallicity relation extends to low-mass galaxies. We then proceeded to the study of NGC 3311, a cD galaxy at the center of the Hydra I cluster. We have confirmed previous observations of the velocity dispersion profile of the system, which indicates the presence of a large photometric substructure which illustrates the ongoing accretion of the diffuse stellar halo. We performed a study of the stellar populations of the system, which indicated that stars in the diffuse stellar halo have been accreted from past merger events of large elliptical galaxies, whereas the central region of the galaxy is most probably the remnant of a rapid dissipative collapse. Moreover, the metallicity of the stars in the photometric substructure suggest an ongoing disruption of dwarf galaxies possibly related to the presence of an infalling group. These results are consistent with the two-phase model for the mass assembly of galaxies, in which massive ellipticals are formed by dissipative processes at high-redshifts, but continue to build-up their halos by the continuous accretion of satellite systems.", "Título em português": "Cinemática e populações estelares de galáxias no universo local", "Palavras-chave em português": ["galáxias: cinemática e dinâmica", "galáxias: conteúdo estelar", "galáxias: elíptica e lenticular e cD", "galáxias: evolução", "galáxias: formação"], "Resumo em português": "Galáxias são os principais blocos de construção do universo, mas ainda estamos aprendendo sobre aspectos fundamentais da sua formação. Em particular, gostaríamos de entender como as galáxias adquirem suas estrelas, e onde e quando essas estrelas nasceram. Nesta tese, investigamos estas questões pelo estudo da dinâmica e das abundâncias químicas de galáxias no universo local. Estendendo trabalhos anteriores na área, desenvolvemos um método Bayesiano para a obtenção de idades, metalicidades e abundância de elementos alfa ponderados pela luminosidade. Em nosso estudo inicial, pesquisamos seis grupos de galáxias para compreender como esse ambiente em  particular pode estar relacionado às transformações morfológicas. Obtivemos uma amostra de 59 membros de grupos com uma vasta gama de massas dinâmicas, que foram utilizados para demonstrar que a relação massa-metalicidade se estende para galáxias de baixa massa. Então, procedemos ao estudo de NGC 3311, uma galáxia cD no centro do aglomerado Hydra I. Confirmamos as observações anteriores do perfil de dispersão da velocidades do sistema, que indicam a presença de uma grande subestrutura fotométrica que ilustra a acreção atual de estrelas no halo estelar difuso. Foi realizado um estudo das populações estelares do sistema, que indica que as estrelas no halo estelar difuso foram obtidas em eventos passados de fusão de grandes galáxias elípticas, enquanto que a região central da galáxia é provavelmente o remanescente de uma rápido colapso dissipativo. Além disso, a metalicidade das estrelas na subestrutura fotométrica sugere a ruptura atual de galáxias anãs relacionadas com a presença de um grupo se movimentando em direção ao centro do aglomerado. Estes resultados são consistentes com o modelo de duas fases para a acumulação da massa de galáxias, no qual galáxias elípticas gigantes são formadas por processos dissipativos em altos redshifts, mas continuam a acrescentar estrelas em seus halos pelo deposição de sistemas satélite.", "Data de Publicação": "2018-05-15", "url": "http://www.teses.usp.br/teses/disponiveis/14/14131/tde-22042018-235533/pt-br.php"}
