{"Documento": "Dissertação de Mestrado", "Autor": "Castro, Diego Alejandro Cueva (Catálogo USP)", "Nome completo": "Diego Alejandro Cueva Castro", "E-mail": "dacuevac@usp.br", "Unidade da USP": "Museu de Zoologia", "Área do Conhecimento": "Sistemática, Taxonomia e Biodiversidade", "Data de Defesa": "2018-03-16", "Imprenta": "São Paulo, 2018", "Orientador": "Silveira, Luis Fábio (Catálogo USP)", "Banca examinadora": ["Silveira, Luis Fábio (Presidente)", "Battilana, Jaqueline", "Francisco, Mercival Roberto"], "Título em inglês": "Molecular phylogeny of Thraupis Boie, 1826 (Aves: Passeriformes) and taxonomic review of the Thraupis episcopus (Linnaeus, 1766) - Thraupis sayaca (Linnaeus, 1766) species complex", "Palavras-chave em inglês": ["Hybridization", "Introgression", "Luís Fábio", "Molecular phylogeny  Thraupis", "Silveira"], "Resumo em inglês": "Currently, the genus Thraupis Boie, 1826 is a monophyletic group with seven species, all of which have high molecular and morphological support. Nevertheless, the phylogenetic relationship of the species still unclear: T. abbas is the sister species of T. ornataT. palmarum clade, and a second group within the genus is composed by the T. episcopusT. sayaca clade. Furthermore, in the remaining species group, one of the species, T. glaucocolpa, has not been included in any of the previous molecular studies, even it was believed to be close related with T. sayaca. Moreover, the last species within the genus, T. cyanoptera, has an uncertain position in the genus phylogenetic tree. The T. episcopusT. sayacaT. galucocolpa species complex includes 18 subspecies and a high morphological variation and a wide distribution which includes overlapping zones of T. episcopus and T. sayaca, makes taxa identification almost impossible. Nonetheless, previous molecular studies had only used samples from two individuals of T. episcopus and one of T. sayaca. Furthermore, the group does not have taxonomic stability, as shown by the multiple changes, which occur at different levels: moving from one genus to another or from species to subspecies level etc. To check the genus, I analyze 1171 specimens. The morphometric analysis outcomes show the weight as the most variable and important measure and T. cyanoptera as the only clearly different species within taxonomic units. Finally, I did a phylogenetic analysis based on two mitochondrial genes (Cyt- and ND2), in addition to three nuclear introns (intron 3 of MUSK gen, intron 5 of TGFB2 gen and a piece of the intron 5 of the BF5 gen). I performed the extractions from tissues collected at different localities around the natural distribution of the species, with emphasis on T. episcopus and T. sayaca. I ran independent locus RAxML analysis and haplotypes networks and used to group the samples on genetic taxonomic units. RAxML and haplotypes analysis shows a close relationship between T. episcopus and T. sayaca with high probably introgression process within. Furthermore, exposed a genetic structure within T. episcopus. I used this genetic taxonomic units to ran a multilocus species tree with a calibrated molecular clock. The species tree suggests that the origin of the genus Thraupis was between 5.5 and 7.5 million years before present, in the Messinian age. Also recovers T. glaucocolpa is the oldest linage in the genus and shows a relation between the morphological traits with the genetic structure within T. episcopus. Finally, I suggest synonymizing several subspecies and elevating to species level the subspecies T. episcopus cana, based on the morphological and molecular data.", "Título em português": "Filogenia molecular dos representantes do gênero Thraupis Boie, 1826 (Aves: Passeriformes) e revisão taxonômica do complexo Thraupis episcopus (Linnaeus, 1766) e T. sayaca (Linnaeus, 1766)", "Palavras-chave em português": ["Filogenia molecular  Thraupis", "Hibridização", "Introgressão", "Luís Fábio.", "Silveira"], "Resumo em português": "O gênero Thraupis Boie, 1826 é um grupo monofilético composto por sete espécies. Entretanto, as relações entre estas espécies continuam obscuras. Thraupis abbas é a espécie irmã do clado T. ornataT. palmarum. Um segundo grupo é composto pelo clado T. episcopusT. sayaca. Por outro lado, T. glaucocolpa não foi incluída em nenhum dos trabalhos que utilizou dados moleculares, enquanto que a posição de T. cyanoptera continua ainda não é clara. O complexo de espécies T. episcopusT. sayacaT. glaucocolpa inclui 18 subespécies e uma grande variação morfológica, além de uma ampla distribuição de várias delas, com áreas de sintopia entre T. episcopus e T. sayaca, onde a identificação destas duas espécies é muito difícil. Estudos moleculares prévios só incluíram amostras de dois indivíduos de T. episcopus e uma de T. sayaca. Este complexo de espécies ainda apresenta uma grande instabilidade taxonômica. Na revisão deste gênero foram analisados 1.171 espécimes. As análises morfométricas mostraram que a massa é o parâmetro que apresenta a maior variação e que T. cyanoptera é a única mais claramente diferençável dentre as unidades taxonômicas. Foi também realizada uma análise filogenética com base em dois marcadores mitocondriais (Cyt- e ND2), além de três íntrons nucleares (íntron 3 do gen MUSK, íntron 5 do gen TGFB2 e uma parte do íntron 5 do gen BF5). Foi realizada uma análise RAxML e das redes de haplótipos independentemente para cada lócus, e esta informação foi utilizada para agrupar as amostras em unidades taxonômicas genéticas. O RAxML e as redes de haplótipos mostraram uma relação próxima entre T. episcopus e T. sayaca, além de uma alta probabilidade de um processo de introgressão entre as espécies. Há também uma evidente estruturação genética em T. episcopus. As unidades taxonômicas genéticas foram utilizadas em uma análise multilocus de árvore de espécies, com um relógio molecular calibrado. A árvore de espécies sugere que a origem do gênero Thraupis se deu entre 5.5 e 7.7 milhões de anos. Thraupis glaucocolpa é a linhagem mais antiga do gênero e a estrutura genética dentro de T. episcopus possui uma relação com as características morfológicas dessa espécie. Finalmente, são sinonimizadas várias subespécies e T. episcopus cana é elevada à espécie com base nos dados morfológicos e moleculares.", "Data de Liberação": "2020-04-16", "Data de Publicação": "2018-05-07", "url": "http://www.teses.usp.br/teses/disponiveis/38/38131/tde-05042018-121307/pt-br.php"}
