{"Documento": "Tese de Doutorado", "Autor": "Arciniegas, Carlos Andres Gonzalez (Catálogo USP)", "Nome completo": "Carlos Andres Gonzalez Arciniegas", "E-mail": "carlosgonza@usp.br", "Unidade da USP": "Instituto de Física", "Área do Conhecimento": "Física", "Data de Defesa": "2017-09-22", "Imprenta": "São Paulo, 2017", "Orientador": "Nussenzveig, Paulo Alberto (Catálogo USP)", "Banca examinadora": ["Nussenzveig, Paulo Alberto (Presidente)", "Fabre, Claude", "Landi, Gabriel Teixeira", "Matos, Christiano José Santiago de", "Pfister, Olivier"], "Título em inglês": "Properties of the light emitted by a silicon on-chip optical parametric oscillator (OPO).", "Palavras-chave em inglês": ["nonlinear optics.", "optical parametric oscillator", "Quantum optics"], "Resumo em inglês": "The Optical Parametric Oscillator (OPO) has been one of the most versatile source of non-classical states of light. Usual configurations of such devices are a macroscopic second order nonlinear crystals inside an optical cavity. Recently the use of silicon photonics techniques allowed the implementation of high quality factor microcavities and OPOs which include several technological advantages over usual configuration as a small size, bigger bandwidth, CMOS compatibility, facility to engineer the dispersion properties and compatibility with commercial optical fiber communications. Nevertheless the nonlinearity present within these systems is a third order nonlinearity for which theoretical calculations lack in the literature. Here we describe theoretically the quantum properties of the light generated in an OPO with a third order nonlinearity. We showed that the effects of phase modulation (which are not present in the second order nonlinearity) and dispersion are determinant in the way that oscillation and entanglement is produced in the system. Despite of these effects, bipartite and tripartite entanglement is predicted with the use of the Schmidt modes formalism. We also describe the system when there are more modes exited within the cavity and a frequency comb is formed. In such a situation, using again the Schmidt modes formalism, multipartite entanglement was predicted as well.", "Título em português": "Propriedades da luz emitida por um oscilador paramétrico ótico em chip de silício", "Palavras-chave em português": ["oscilador paramétrico ótico", "ótica não-linear", "Ótica quântica"], "Resumo em português": "O oscilador paramétrico ótico (OPO) tem sido uma fonte muito versátil de estados não clássicos da luz. A configuração usual destes OPOs consiste em um cristal macroscópico com não linearidade de segunda ordem no interior de uma cavidade ótica. Recentemente, devido ao desenvolvimento da fotonica de silício, foi possível a implementação de micro- cavidades óticas e OPOs que possuem varias vantagens sobre OPOs usuais. Não entanto a não linearidade destes sistemas é de terceira ordem. Neste trabalho, descrevemos teoricamente as propriedades quânticas da luz gerada num OPO com não linearidade de terceira ordem. Mostra-se que os efeitos de modulação de fase (não presentes na não linearidade de segunda ordem) e a dispersão são determinantes para a geração e o emaranhamento produzido no sistema. Emaranhamento bi e tri partito foi predito teoricamente usando o formalismo de modos de Schmidt. Também foi feita uma descrição quando mais modos da cavidade são excitados gerando um pente de frequência. Nesta situação. e utilizando novamente o formalismo de modos de Schmidt, foi predito emaranhamento multimodo destes sistemas.", "Data de Publicação": "2017-11-23", "url": "http://www.teses.usp.br/teses/disponiveis/43/43134/tde-22112017-153330/pt-br.php"}
