{"Documento": "Dissertação de Mestrado", "Autor": "Almeida, Helio Miguel dos Reis (Catálogo USP)", "Nome completo": "Helio Miguel dos Reis Almeida", "E-mail": "helio.mgl@gmail.com", "Unidade da USP": "Instituto Oceanográfico", "Área do Conhecimento": "Oceanografia Física", "Data de Defesa": "2017-07-04", "Imprenta": "São Paulo, 2017", "Orientador": "Silveira, Ilson Carlos Almeida da (Catálogo USP)", "Banca examinadora": ["Silveira, Ilson Carlos Almeida da (Presidente)", "Gangoppadhyay, Avijit", "Flierl, Glenn Richard"], "Título em inglês": "Mesoscale variability of the Brazil Current in the Santos Bight: is it locally or remotely forced?", "Palavras-chave em inglês": ["Brazil Current", "Nondispersive Line", "Santos Bight", "Subinertial Variability", "Vorticity Waves"], "Resumo em inglês": "The Brazil Current (BC) is possibly one of the least studied western boundary currents (WBCs) in the world ocean. Its unique vertical structure makes this a different WBC in terms of velocity and transport. Although significant progress has been made over the last decade, the BC system variability within the Santos Bight (SB, 23°S-28°S) is very poorly understood despite its strategic role for Brazil in terms of energy. The BC thickens and changes its vertical structure and dynamical modal composition as it crosses the SB. As it enters the bight by trying to contour Cape Frio (Cf, 23°S), the BC is about 500 m deep. As the current leaves the bight south of Cape Santa Marta (CSM, 28°S) it is 1300 m. These differences in thickness and accompanying velocity vertical shear are due to the impinging branch of the intermediate South Equatorial Current (SEC) generating the so called Santos Bifurcation (SBi). We here investigate the subinertial variability of the BC system within the SB primarily using satellite altimetry data and some traditional spectral analysis techniques. We also analyzed quasi-synoptic observations of an oceanographic cruise, which was part of the IOUSP-PETROBRAS CERES Experiment. We identified that there are different phenomena occurring to the north and to the south of the bifurcation and this might be caused by the SBi feature itself and/or the consequential change in the BC vertical structure downstream. North of the SBi, we detected oscillations with period of 92 days and a wavelength of 490 km and which represent about a fifth of the BC variability at 25°S. The 92-day oscillations are nonlinear vorticity waves, which are originated to the east of 35°W and propagate zonally towards the BC axis. These waves then perturb the current exciting oscillatory motions of the same period and which propagate downstream. South of the SBi axis (~28°S), we identified two different maxima in the ω - κ spectrum. They correspond to oscillations with periods (wavelengths) of 68 and 148 days (397 km and 790 km). The longer wave is also a baroclinic first-mode nonlinear vorticity waves propagating with westward phase speed of the nondispersive planetary Rossby waves of same period. They are originated in the ocean interior and we were able to track its signal as far as 5°W. The 68-day waves has its existence limited to vicinities of the BC. Phase speeds have approximately the BC axis orientation and they can only be clearly detected between ~27°S and ~32°S. This propagating signal accounts with a variance of ~21% on the BC axis. Quasi-synoptic observations allowed the mapping of a anticyclone and a cyclone of such waves. They seem to have modal composition very similar to the BC itself, which might provide additional evidence of local origin.", "Título em português": "Variabilidade de mesoescala da Corrente do Brasil na Bacia de Santos: forçada local ou remotamente?", "Palavras-chave em português": ["Bacia de Santos", "Corrente do Brasil", "Linha não dispersiva", "Ondas de Vorticidades", "Variabilidade Subinercial"], "Resumo em português": "A Corrente do Brasil (CB) é provavelmente a Corrente de Contorno Oeste (CCO) menos estudada dos oceanos mundiais. A sua estrutura vertical única es faz dela uma CCO diferente em termos de velocidade e transporte. Apesar dos avanços significativos na última década, a variabilidade da CB na Bacia de Santos (BS, 23°S-28°S) ainda é pouco conhecida, apesar do papel estratégico da região na matriz energética brasileira. A CB se espessa mudando a sua estrutura vertical e muda sua estrutura dinâmica no domínio da BS. Na região de Cabo Frio (23°S) a corrente tem cerca de 500 m de profundidade. Ao sair da BS na região do Cabo de Santa Marta (28°S) a corrente se estende até cerca de 1300 m. Estas variações na espessura da corrente e consequente diferença no cisalhamento vertical de velocidade ocorrem devido à presença da Corrente Sul Equatorial em nível intermediário na região gerando a Bifurcação de Santos (BiS). Neste trabalho investigamos a variabilidade subinercial da CB na Bacia de Santos usando primeiramente dado alimétrico e um conjunto de análise espectral. Foram depois estudados fenômenos geradores dessa variabilidade com dados quasi-sinóticos do um cruzeiro oceanográfico CERES V do conjunto IOUSP-PETROBRAS. Foram identificados fenômenos diferentes no norte e sul da Bifurcação de Santos e esta diferença é provavelmente devido à presença da bifurcação ou à mudança que esta causa na estrutura da CB. Ao norte da BiS foi identificada uma oscilação com período de 92 dias e comprimento de onda de 490 km explicando um quinto da variabilidade da CB em 25°S. A oscilação de 92 dias está relacionada com ondas de vorticidade não lineares originadas a leste da corrente em ~35°W e se propagam zonalmente até ao eixo da corrente. Estas ondas perturbam a corrente originando oscilações com mesmo período e que propagam ao longo do eixo da corrente. Ao sul da BiS (~27°S) foram identificados dois máximos no espectro κ - ω. Os máximos correspondem a oscilações com período (comprimento de onda) de 68 e 148 dias (397 e 790 km). A onda com maior comprimento de onda é também uma onda de vorticidade de primeiro modo baroclínico não linear propagando para oeste com velocidade de fase de ondas de Rossby não dispersivas. Estas ondas são originadas no interior da bacia oceânica e seu sinal foi identificado chegando até 5°W. A onda de 68 dias existe apenas no domínio da CB. Esta onda propaga fase num eixo aproximadamente paralelo à CB e são detadas de forma clara apenas entre ~27°S e ~32°S. Esta onda explica uma variância da CB de ~21% ao longo do seu eixo. Observações quasi-sinóticas permitiram mapear um anticiclone e um ciclone associado a essa onda. Os vórtices aparentam uma estrutura modal muito semelhante à da corrente.", "Data de Publicação": "2018-04-04", "url": "http://www.teses.usp.br/teses/disponiveis/21/21135/tde-26032018-143335/pt-br.php"}
